KW edits 06/05 (#1)
ejm714/scipy_proceedings: papers/emily_dorne/main.md

# Introduction

Inland water bodies provide a variety of critical services for both human and aquatic life, including drinking water, recreational and economic opportunities, and marine habitats. Harmful algal blooms (HABs) pose a significant risk to inland bodies, requiring water quality managers to make urgent decisions around public health warnings and closures. HABs produce toxins that are poisonous to humans and their pets, and threaten marine ecosystems by blocking sunlight and oxygen.

While there are established methods for using satellite imagery to detect cyanobacteria in larger water bodies like oceans, detection in small inland lakes, reservoirs, and rivers remains a challenge. Whereas manual water sampling is time and resource intensive, machine learning models can generate estimates in seconds. Automatic detection enables water managers to better prioritize limited manual sampling resources and can provide a birds-eye view of water conditions across a region. Machine learning is particularly well-suited to this task because indicators of cyanobacteria are visible in free, routinely collected satellite imagery.

> [**CyFi**](https://cyfi.drivendata.org/)**, short for Cyanobacteria Finder, is an open-source Python package that uses satellite imagery and machine learning to detect cyanobacteria levels.** Cyanobacteria, or blue-green algae, is a major type of HAB. CyFi helps decision makers protect the public by flagging the highest-risk areas in lakes, reservoirs, and rivers quickly and easily. CyFi represents a significant advancement in environmental monitoring, providing higher-resolution detection capabilities that can pinpoint areas at risk of cyanobacterial contamination. Key strengths of CyFi compared to other tools include:

Author: I think we should generally avoid bolding sentences since it will look weird when the PDF is rendered

> [**CyFi**](https://cyfi.drivendata.org/)**, short for Cyanobacteria Finder, is an open-source Python package that uses satellite imagery and machine learning to detect cyanobacteria levels.** Cyanobacteria, or blue-green algae, is a major type of HAB. CyFi helps decision makers protect the public by flagging the highest-risk areas in lakes, reservoirs, and rivers quickly and easily. CyFi represents a significant advancement in environmental monitoring, providing higher-resolution detection capabilities that can pinpoint areas at risk of cyanobacterial contamination. Key strengths of CyFi compared to other tools include:

Author: ```suggestion
[CyFi(https://cyfi.drivendata.org/), short for Cyanobacteria Finder, is an open-source Python package that uses satellite imagery and machine learning to detect cyanobacteria levels. Cyanobacteria, or blue-green algae, is a major type of HAB. CyFi helps decision makers protect the public by flagging the highest-risk areas in lakes, reservoirs, and rivers quickly and easily. CyFi represents a significant advancement in environmental monitoring, providing higher-resolution detection capabilities that can pinpoint areas at risk of cyanobacterial contamination. Key strengths of CyFi compared to other tools include:
```

- Features derived from high-resolution Sentinel-2 satellite data
- A fast and computationally efficient boosted tree machine learning algorithm
- A straightforward command line interface
- A new training dataset of almost 13,000 data points across the continental U.S.

> This paper presents a detailed examination of the development of CyFi. It will explore the algorithm's evolution, learnings about what model-building methods are most effective for inland HABs, and the broader implications of machine learning competitions for scientific advancements. CyFi was originally developed as part of an open-souce machine learning competitions. Takeaways from the winning models were combined during a model experimentation phase, and shaped by real-world context surfaced through user interviews with water quality managers.

Author: ```suggestion
This paper presents a detailed examination of the development of CyFi. It will explore the algorithm's evolution, learnings about what model-building methods are most effective for inland HABs, and the broader implications of machine learning competitions for scientific advancements. CyFi was originally developed as part of an open-souce machine learning competition. Takeaways from the winning models were combined during a model experimentation phase, and shaped by real-world context surfaced through user interviews with water quality managers.
```

Harmful algal blooms are a pressing environmental and public health issue, characterized by the rapid and excessive growth of algae in water bodies. These blooms can produce toxins, such as microcystins and anatoxins, that pose severe risks to human health, pets, and aquatic ecosystems. Being exposed to these toxins through ingestion, skin contact, or inhalation can result in a variety of acute and chronic health issues, including gastrointestinal illnesses, liver damage, neurological effects, and even death in extreme cases. The most common risks of exposure are drinking from a contaminated reservoir and swimming in a contaminated lake, which is particularly dangerous for pets.

Ecologically, HABS can create hypoxic (low oxygen) conditions in water bodies, resulting in massive fish kills and the disruption of aquatic food webs. HABs can form dense algal mats that block sunlight, inhibiting the growth of submerged vegetation essential for aquatic habitats. Furthermore, the decomposition of large algal blooms consumes significant amounts of dissolved oxygen, exacerbating oxygen depletion and leading to dead zones where most aquatic life cannot survive.

> **These ecological impacts can have devastating economic consequences for local industries reliant on water resources, such as fisheries, tourism, and recreation.** Beaches and lakeside areas affected by algal blooms often face closures, leading to a loss of revenue. The cost of managing and mitigating the effects of HABs, including water treatment and healthcare expenses, places additional financial burdens on affected communities.

Author: ```suggestion
These ecological impacts can have devastating economic consequences for local industries reliant on water resources, such as fisheries, tourism, and recreation. Beaches and lakeside areas affected by algal blooms often face closures, leading to a loss of revenue. The cost of managing and mitigating the effects of HABs, including water treatment and healthcare expenses, places additional financial burdens on affected communities.
```

An example of the @fig:10m image at 30m resolution
:::

- [ ] TODO: I would combine these into one figure with the two images next to one another.

Effectively monitoring inland HABs and protecting public health requires developing new innovative tools that capture a higher spatial resolution, can be run quickly and frequently, and are accessible to decision makers. CyFi aims to fill this gap by incorporating higher-resolution satellite imagery, an efficient tree-based model, and a user-friendly command line interface.

# Methods

## Machine learning competition

> The machine learning models in CyFi were originally developed in the [Tick Tick Bloom: Harmful Algal Detection Challenge](https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/143/tick-tick-bloom/), which ran from December 2022 to February 2023. Machine learning competition can harness the power of community-driven innovation and rapidly test a wide variety of possible data sources, model architectures, and features. Tick Tick Bloom was created by DrivenData on behalf of NASA and in collaboration with NOAA, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Department of Defense Defense Innovation Unit, Berkeley AI Research, and Microsoft AI for Earth.

Author: ```suggestion
The machine learning approach in CyFi was originally developed as part of the [Tick Tick Bloom: Harmful Algal Detection Challenge](https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/143/tick-tick-bloom/), which ran from December 2022 to February 2023. Machine learning competition can harness the power of community-driven innovation and rapidly test a wide variety of possible data sources, model architectures, and features. Tick Tick Bloom was created by DrivenData on behalf of NASA and in collaboration with NOAA, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Department of Defense Defense Innovation Unit, Berkeley AI Research, and Microsoft AI for Earth.
```

However, transforming this research code into production code requires significant additional work. A gap between competition results and code that can be deployed exists for a few reasons:
1. Competitions rely on static data exported and processed once. Deployment requires repeated, automatic use with new data.
2. Winning models are relatively unconstrained by the size and cost of their solutions. For ongoing use, efficiency matters.
3. Competition code is validated once with anticipated, clean data and static versions of Python package dependencies. In the real world things break and change; use requires basic robustness, testing and configurability.
4. There is substantial variability in the clarity and organization of competition-winning code. Usable code requires others to be able to understand, maintain, and build on the codebase.

> An open-source Python package brings together these improvements to enable regularly generated predictions of cyanobacteria levels. To develop a package, we assessed model performance and efficiency opportunities, combined and iterated the most useful pieces of the winning approaches into a single model, and simplified and restructured code to transform it into a runnable pipeline. The result is CyFi, a configurable code package capable of generating cyanobacteria predictions on new input data. CyFi is a clearn, reproducible repository that incorporates open source best practices, including tests and continuous integration. CyFi is fully ready for integration into state-level dashboard and decision-making processes.

Author: ```suggestion
An open-source Python package brings together these improvements to enable regularly generated predictions of cyanobacteria levels. To develop a package, we assessed model performance and efficiency opportunities, combined and iterated on the most useful pieces of the winning approaches into a single model, and simplified and restructured code to transform it into a runnable pipeline. The result is CyFi, a configurable code package capable of generating cyanobacteria predictions on new input data. CyFi is a clearn, reproducible repository that incorporates open source best practices, including tests and continuous integration. CyFi is fully ready for integration into state-level dashboards and decision-making processes.
```

### User interviews

We conducted human-centered design interviews with subject matter experts and end users to design a package that optimally address on-the-ground user needs. Interviewees included representatives from California, New York, Georgia, Louisiana, Florida, and Michigan. These states were selected because they present a diversity of geographic locations, number of water bodies in the region, HAB severity, investment in HABs monitoring, and technical sophistication of current approaches. User interviews focused on understanding current water quality decision-making processes, including the data and tools used to support those decisions. Learnings were used to inform the format for surfacing predictions, priorities in model performance, and computational constraints.

@tbl:interview_takeaways summarizes the core design decsisions for CyFi that were rooted in insights from user interviews.

### Model experimentation

> Additional model testing was conducted to determine which winning approaches were the most robust, accurate, and generalizable outside of the competition setting. The table below summarizes the matrix of experiments that were conducted. Model experimentation informed key decisions around which data sources were used, how satellite imagery was selected and processed, and what target variable the model generated. Standard best practices were used to inform hyperparameters tuning for the final model.

Author: ```suggestion
Additional model testing was conducted to determine which winning approaches were the most robust, accurate, and generalizable outside of the competition setting. The table below summarizes the matrix of experiments that were conducted. Model experimentation informed key decisions around which data sources were used, how satellite imagery was selected and processed, and which target variable was use. Standard best practices were used to inform hyperparameters tuning for the final model.
```

## Data sources

CyFi relies on two data sources as input:
1. Sentinel-2 satellite imagery
2. Land cover classifications from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization's Land Cover Classification System (LCCS)

> **Sentinel-2** is a wide-swath, high-resolution, multi-spectral imaging mission. The Sentinel-2 Multispectral Instrument (MSI) samples 13 spectral bands: four bands at 10 meters, six bands at 20 meters and three bands at 60 meters spatial resolution. The mission provides global coverage of the Earth's land surface every 5 days. Sentinel-2 data was accessed through Microsoft's Planetary Computer.

Author: ```suggestion
**Sentinel-2** is a wide-swath, high-resolution, multi-spectral imaging mission. The Sentinel-2 Multispectral Instrument (MSI) samples 13 spectral bands: four bands at 10 meters, six bands at 20 meters and three bands at 60 meters spatial resolution. The mission provides global coverage of the Earth's land surface every 5 days. Sentinel-2 data is accessed through Microsoft's Planetary Computer.
```
